Introduction
	Consider the proposition stated by Plantinga in God, Freedom, and Evil: 

God is omniscient, omnipotent, and wholly good

Many philosophers find (1) improbable given the vast amount of evil that exists. I want to offer a plausible explanation as to why God would permit so much evil, one that would make it not epistemically improbable that the God defined in the Christian Bible exists given that a vast amount of evil exists.
Defining the Terms
In God, Freedom, and Evil, Plantinga fleshes out definitions of omnipotence and omniscience that can be generally agreed upon, or at the very least there are no aspects of these definitions that stick out like a sore thumb. Using his definition of omnipotence, “there are no nonlogical limits to what an omnipotent being can do,” and an omniscient being is “unlimited in knowledge” and “knows every true proposition and believes none that are false.”
However, I think that the definition of wholly good is much less clear cut than the previous two. Is a wholly good being just a judge that pardons even the worst of criminals because personally he forgives all of them, and lets them go out and commit other evil deeds? It isn’t quite clear what is meant by a being that is “wholly good”, but I don’t think that it can simply be passed off as omnibenevolence. I would like to explain what it means to be “wholly good” in a way that would not only explain why God would permit moral evil, but make it such that the presence of evil would be probable given the proposition that the biblical God exists. 
	When the word good appears in theological texts, it is often synonymous with righteousness. In the ESV Christian Bible, Romans 3:10 states, “As it is written: none is righteous, no, not one.” This verse references Psalms 14:3 in the Old Testament, which states, “They have all turned aside; together they have become corrupt; there is none who does good, not even one.” So using the definition of good in the theistic sense is very closely tied to the definition of righteousness. However, what would a being that is maximally righteous look like? I don’t dare say that I can give a concrete picture, but what I can do is use some standards acknowledged by academics as a means of measuring righteousness. 
The Moral Foundations 
One popular measure of morality or righteousness used in current psychology is the Moral Foundations Theory (MFT), proposed by psychologist Jonathan Haidt and popularized in his book, The Righteous Mind. To explain why morality has so many recurrent themes across cultures, Haidt gives a few universal moral themes, or foundations, that are rooted in our innate evolutionary behaviors. Although this theory isn’t without flaws, I believe that it is sufficient for the specific purpose of defining righteousness. However, the MFT was created with the human mind in mind, so the evolutionary theories that apply to man most certainly do not apply to God. However, humans are created imago dei, or in the image of God, having the capacity to know what is righteous and what is not. In the words of Thomas Aquinas, 
Since humans beings are said to be in the image of God in virtue of their having a nature that includes an intellect, such a nature is most in the image of God in virtue of being most able to imitate God;

If God considered righteousness and morality to be important concepts to know, then it would follow that we would be like Him in knowing these concepts. 
This theory has five foundations: care/harm, fairness/cheating, loyalty/betrayal, authority/subversion, and sanctity/degradation. This is by no means an exhaustive list of scales by which morality can be measured, as Haidt has also considered adding more foundations such as liberty/oppression, but I think that righteousness has a place on the scales of each of these five foundations. 
A Righteous God
According to MFT, the definition of a wholly good or righteous God would be a God who is maximally caring, maximally fair, maximally loyal, obeys hierarchy perfectly, and is maximally sanctified. However, I will only be focusing on the first two foundations because those two are the ones that create the conflict in which sin is able to exist, and the rest of the attributes are not relevant to my argument.
The first foundation of care may be what most people think of when they say that God is “good”. As stated by Haidt et al., “This foundation…  underlies virtues of kindness, gentleness, and nurturance.” In most cases when people refer to a “good” God they are talking about a God that hates it when we are hurt, when we feel pain and suffer. He possesses an infinite love for us and wants what’s best for us and for us to be happy. This is a trait of God that is agreed upon even in Islam and Judaism. However, most people who try to define the concept of “good” stop here and find some sort of implicit contradiction or improbability in (1). This is only one aspect of righteousness, so there is still a ways to go before we can properly define a maximally righteous God. 
	The second foundation of MFT is fairness. In order for God to be wholly good, he must be completely fair or just. This is also agreed upon in the three monotheistic religions. In the Torah, the Bible, and the Qur’an, God is a just being, paying “an eye for an eye”. An eye for an eye emphasizes a need for exact fairness in transactions between two beings: if Peter takes something from Paul, something of equal objective value must be taken from Peter and given to Paul. A transaction with exact fairness is impossible for us to perform since we know very little about the objective worth of anything nor how to calculate it, so we are never able to be truly fair. However, as an omniscient being, God is able to carry out completely fair transactions, since he knows the objective worth of all things.
These two attributes of God, being loving or caring and being just, come into conflict when a being that God loves does an act that is deserving of punishment. In this case, God would possess two opposing instincts: he would want to prevent pain from coming to that being because he is an infinitely loving God, but he must also inflict punishment upon humans for their wrong actions, because to not do so would make God unjust. In the Christian Bible, this conflict in directives was absolved by Jesus’ crucifixion, where Jesus paid for the sins of all of humanity with his life, taking on the punishment intended for humans. Humans no longer have to atone for their sins; they just need to place their faith in Jesus and their punishment is absolved. But is the punishment absolved for those who will never put their faith in Jesus throughout their lifetime? I don’t think it is, and God has allowed evil to run rampant in this world to act as an opportunity for those who have faith in Jesus by the end of their lifetime and to act as a punishment for those who don’t. 
Evil as Grace
To address the question of why God would allow evil to exist, I would like to reference an idea by William Lane Craig, an American philosopher and Christian theologian. He states that in the Christian religion, “the chief purpose of life is not happiness, but the knowledge of God.” Going back to the moral foundation of care, a maximally caring God would want what is best for us, but what is best for us may not align with what brings us the most happiness. John 3:16 states, “For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life.” God wants us to be happy, but what God wants more than that is for us to have eternal life and spend it with Him, and the only way to obtain this eternal life is through Jesus, God’s son. John 14:6 states, “Jesus said to him, ‘I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.” Without such a vast amount of evil, the world would be a happier place, but it is hard to say if there would be more people who place their faith in Jesus Christ and obtain eternal life. If instead of having pain and suffering in the world and everyone was housed, well fed, and content, how inclined would we be to believe that there was something terribly wrong with the world and the way we live? We would be happy for our entire lives, but by the end of it, if we don’t have Jesus, we would not have eternal life. The Christian religion tells us we are saved from our depravity, but if there were less evil in the world, how inclined would people be to think that humanity as a whole is depraved?
On the reverse side, if there was an overwhelming amount of evil in the world and our depravity was made all too clear, knowing Jesus to be our only salvation, would we be pursuing our faith because of Jesus or because of the salvation that comes with him? John 6:26-35 says, “Jesus answered them… ‘you are seeking me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate your fill of the loaves. Do not work for the food that perishes, but for the food that endures to eternal life… I am the bread of life;’” If we were to pursue Jesus because of the benefits that come along with him and not because of his intrinsic worth, we would not obtain salvation. So it seems that there needs to be some sort of middle ground where the maximum number of people are able to realize that Jesus is their salvation, but not because they desperately desire salvation but because they are able to understand the intrinsic worth of God. The amount of sin in the world is not arbitrary, but instead God has set it so that the maximum number of people can be saved. So although there are many evils that may seem pointless with regards to producing happiness, they may not be unjustified for God to allow them if they give more people knowledge of himself. 
Evil as Punishment
	It is not hard to see evil as punishment. If God exists, then it is the default view for many to see evil as such. But what exactly did humans do that made it so that we are deserving of so much evil in the world? Romans 3:23 from the Bible states, “For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.” So the action that humans have committed are sins, but what is the punishment for sin? As we discussed earlier, an eye for an eye is a demand for exact objective fairness. However, it isn’t any ordinary person that our crime is against, but it is God, the being that is perfectly good. Psalms 84:10 states, “for a day in [God’s] courts is better than a thousand elsewhere. I would rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God than dwell in the tents of wickedness.” Just as a brand new Ferrari is worth more than my dad’s 1998 Toyota Sienna despite the fact that both are cars, the things of God are objectively worth more than the things of man, so much more so that the least of God’s possessions are worth more than the entirety of what man possesses. 
So the punishment would be for us to suffer the same sin we commit against God as a perfectly good being. The problem with this is that we are sinful beings, and therefore we are not able to carry the weight of God’s justice, so the punishment of an eye for an eye cannot be carried out. Going back to the previous example, say I took my friend’s brand new Ferrari and then totaled it soon after. My friend (who is probably no longer my friend) now comes to seek reparations for his Ferrari. However, as a poor college student, even if I gave him everything I had, the aggregate value would not match the Ferrari. I also dropped out of college soon after, and have no skills by which I am able to earn the money to repay him with. I am unable to repay my debt, so I am eternally on the guilty side and cannot be redeemed. In the same way, we have laid claim to God’s prized possessions (ourselves, since we originally belonged to him) and defiled them with sin, but we have nothing to repay him with. John 15:5 states, “I am the vine; you are the branches. Whoever abides in me and I in him, he it is that bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing.” Our objective worth is contingent on our reliance and faith in God, so once we laid claim to ourselves, we lost all intrinsic value, so we can’t even return what we took. 
Conclusion
What does this mean for those who don’t believe? It means that they are always deserving of punishment because they are eternally guilty, but no amount of punishment could ever atone for the sins they committed; living in a world filled with evil is just the beginning of their punishment. However, this does not mean God does not love them; for every human being, evil is either an opportunity to turn towards God or an act of divine punishment for unatoned sins.If that person turns towards God, the punishment is taken on by Jesus. If the person does not, then God has shown his love by giving them the opportunity to do so. In no situation has God shirked from his role as a just God or a loving God. Sin fits perfectly into the picture like a missing puzzle piece. So when “wholly good” is defined as wholly loving and completely just, evil would not make the existence of a wholly omnipotent, omniscient, and good God to exist.

